Welcome to Regularization in Linear Regression.
After watching this video, you will be able to define regularization for linear regression
and compare linear, ridge, and lasso regression methods.
Regularization is a regression technique to prevent overfitting.
It constrains the model during training, discouraging it from overfitting to the training data.
Regularization achieves this goal by suppressing the size of its coefficients.
With regularization, a modified cost function is used to optimize the linear regression
model, which has the general form, regularized cost function equals mean squared error plus
lambda times penalty term.
Here, lambda is a parameter that controls the influence of the penalty term, and the
penalty measures the size of the coefficients.
Common regularized regression methods like ridge and lasso regularization use specific penalty terms.
Linear regression models the relationship between two or more variables by fitting a
straight line to the given data set.
In ordinary linear regression, predictions are a linear combination of features, and
the goal is to minimize the loss function, usually measured as the mean squared error
– MSE – between the predicted and actual target values.
Mathematically, the linear regression model is defined by a linear combination of the
form y-hat equals theta-zero plus theta-one x-one plus theta-two x-two plus theta-n x-n,
where the x-i are the feature vectors that can be represented as a matrix X that includes
a constant value of 1 in the first entry to account for the bias, or intercept term, theta-zero,
and the thetas are the unknown weights, which can be represented as a matrix theta.
The weights are commonly referred to as the coefficients of the linear regression model.
Ridge and lasso are regularized forms of linear regression that differ only in their cost functions.
Regular linear regression has no penalty term, while ridge regression uses an L2 or sum-of-squares
penalty on its coefficients, which helps to shrink them.
Lasso regression uses an L1 or sum-of-absolute-values penalty on its coefficients.
This penalty can shrink some coefficients to exactly zero.
Lasso regression responds well to feature sparsity, making it useful for feature selection
and data compression tasks.
In machine learning, sparse coefficients mean that only a small number of variables significantly
contribute to a dataset, while the remaining have little or no impact.
The plot here shows a simulated set of sparse coefficients, labeled as black dots, with
a high signal-to-noise ratio, SNR.
The simulation displays coefficient values for each of the 100 features.
It has 5 non-sparse coefficients, with a high SNR meaning they stand out strongly.
As you can see, all three regression methods predict the non-zero coefficients very well.
Lasso finds the zero coefficients exactly, while linear and ridge have some difficulty
predicting the zero coefficients, with linear regression doing slightly better than ridge
regression.
In this plot, we have a simulated set of sparse coefficients labeled as black dots, with a
low SNR.
Evidently, linear regression performs very poorly in this case, as it tends to greatly
overestimate the ideal coefficients, overshoot most of the zero coefficients, and assign
large negative coefficients when they should be zero.
This illustrates the fact that ordinary linear regression is sensitive to noisy data.
As you can also see, ridge and lasso have similar abilities in predicting the non-zero
coefficients, but lasso is much better than ridge at finding the zero coefficients.
Even in this low SNR environment, lasso is a great feature selector.
This plot shows non-sparse coefficients with a high SNR.
As you can see, all three regression methods predict the non-zero coefficients very well,
with the ridge erring slightly more than the others.
Lasso finds all of the zero coefficients, while linear and ridge have some difficulty
the zero coefficients, with linear regression doing slightly better than ridge regression.
In this plot, we have non-sparse coefficients with a low SNR.
Evidently, linear regression performs very poorly in this case, as it tends to overestimate
the ideal coefficients, overshoot most of the zero coefficients, and assign large negative
coefficients even though all coefficients here are positive.
This illustrates that ordinary linear regression is sensitive to noisy data.
As you can also see, ridge regression slightly outperforms lasso when it comes to predicting
the non-zero coefficients, but lasso is better at finding the zero coefficients.
Even in this low SNR environment, lasso is a great feature selector.
This chart displays the results of training lasso, ridge, and regular linear regression
for a moderately noisy target variable.
The results show the predictions made on the test data after each model was trained on
70% of the dataset.
The top row shows three scatter plots, comparing test predictions against the actual lasso,
ridge, and regular regression test values.
The result for lasso is much more concentrated around the ideal 45-degree line than the other
two results.
The bottom row of plots illustrates the exact comparisons instead of two superimposed plots
of the regression predictions and actual values.
Again, you can see that lasso outperformed both ridge and regular regression because
its predictions track well with the actual values.
In addition, the MSEs are displayed for all three models.
The MSE for lasso is about 30 times less than the MSEs for ridge and regular linear
regression.
This table summarizes the relative performances of linear, ridge, and lasso regression methods
in high and low SNR environments for sparse and non-sparse coefficients.
In all scenarios, lasso performs the best out of the three methods.
Regular linear regression performs well in high SNR environments and poorly in low SNR
environments.
The methods rank similarly whether the SNR is high or low, with the ridge holding its
rating in all cases.
For low SNR, lasso and ridge are clear winners.
In this video, you learned
Regularization is a regression technique to prevent overfitting.
It constrains the model during training, discouraging it from overfitting to the training data.
In ordinary linear regression, predictions are a linear combination of features, and
the goal is to minimize the loss function.
Ridge and lasso are regularized forms of linear regression that differ only in their cost
functions.
Regular linear regression has no penalty term, while ridge regression uses an L2, or sum
of squares penalty, on its coefficients, which helps to shrink them.
Lasso regressions use an L1, or sum of absolute values penalty on its coefficients.
Linear regression suffers from overfitting in the presence of noise because it is highly
sensitive to outliers.
You can use regularization techniques in conjunction with linear regression to mitigate such errors.